    Handcycling was developed in the 1980s by people working to create alternate types of
human-powered vehicles. So it was almost by accident that a new world of cycling was
opened to people with disabilities. ...
    "The disabled community picked up on it right away," said Ian Lawless, Colorado
regional director and cycling director for Adaptive Adventures. Even people with one
working arm can handcycle with some modifications made to the equipment, said Lawless.
"Just about anyone can do it. It's an accessible sport. It's not just for racing; it's also for
recreational riding. It's a barrier breaker that allows a disabled rider to participate in cycling
with friends and families who may be riding conventional bicycles."
    In the 25 years since its development, handcycling has continued to grow in popularity.
It's been part of the IPC [International Paralympic Committee] cycling program since 1998,
and the 2004 Paralympics included handcycling racing for the first time. Today, thousands
of people, able-bodied and those with disabilities, have turned to handcycling as a means to
improve their cardiovascular health, increase upper-body strength, compete, and ride with
friends and family. ...
    An upright handcycle is an entry-level bike for those who are new to the sport, who just
want exercise or recreation, or who don't want to ride very long distances or go very fast.
Because of their higher center of gravity, upright handcycles aren't suitable for speeds
higher than 15 mph. The internal gear systems, borrowed from the cycling industry,
usually come in a choice of three or seven speeds, which naturally limits the speed to less
than 15 mph. They are easy to transfer in and out of from a wheelchair, and have a natural,
fork-type steering system.
    Recumbent<sup>1</sup> handcycles come in a few different variations. There are two steering
options: fork-steer and lean-to-steer, and two seating options: one where the rider reclines
and the other, a "trunk-power" version, where the rider leans forward. They usually come
with 27-gear drivetrains,2 although they can be purchased with three- or seven-gear
drivetrains.
    The trunk-power handcycle doesn't have much of a seatback. The cranks are low to the
ground and far away from the rider. With this arrangement, riders are able to put the weight
of their trunks behind each stroke, allowing them to go faster for longer. The limitation to
this type of handcycle, Lawless said, is that the athlete must have control of most or all of
his abdominal muscles, so it may not be suitable for all athletes.
    With the other seating option, the rider sits in a seat with a reclined back. The cranks
are higher and closer, allowing the rider to use the seatback for leverage to rotate the
cranks. ...
    The lean-to-steer version has a two-piece frame where the top frame swivels over the
bottom frame. The front wheel turns along with the seat. The rider initiates the turn by
leaning his whole body. There is a bit of a learning curve with this type, but many riders
prefer this type because they have a feel similar to monoskiing.3 They're used primarily, but
not exclusively, by people with lower-level disabilities. Lawless said there's no advantage of
one type of steering over the other. It's primarily a matter of the athlete's preference. ...

- Disabled Sports USA excerpted from "Handcycling 101" Challenge Magazine, Spring 2005 http://www.dsusa.org

<sup>1</sup> recumbent - reclining
<sup>2</sup> drivetrain - pedal connected to the gears to make the bike move forward
<sup>3</sup> monoskiing - one ski for both feet, using the whole body to steer
