    We are packing up the house. The air is pulpy with the smells of cardboard and
newsprint, and every room is lined with boxes, flaps fanned open at the top. We pack and
pack-eighty boxes already, and so far, with two weeks still to go, we haven't missed a thing.
What do we keep it all for? Books and more books; unused wedding presents and
mismatched wine glasses; worn-out stuffed animals and outgrown toys; sheaves of letters;
boxes of loose photographs; a landfill of sweaters, shoes, and clothes: the weighty
apparatus of four lives. It will take more than two hundred book boxes, dish barrels, mirror
boxes, mattress crates, a football field of paper, bubble wrap, and tape to contain it all. We
want to contain it. We want to hold it tight. ...
    <i>There's no place like home</i>, Dorothy chants, clicking her ruby heels as she recites her
dream-dissolving spell. I've moved half a dozen times since I first left my parents' house for
college, twenty-five years ago this fall, and sometimes I wonder if there is any place I'll ever
really feel at home. I feel loose-footed on this spinning planet, as displaced as those
mountains vanished in the fog. Of course, you don't have to move physically to leave
yourself behind. Something is lost with every tick of the second hand on the clock. ...
    My parents still live in the house in which I grew up, and my childhood room remains
almost exactly the way I left it when I last lived there at eighteen. It's a shrine to my
long-vanished child-self, a garden gone to seed, a tangle of dusty paperbacks, knickknacks,
and disheveled dolls. My mother refuses to throw anything away, although lately she's been
urging me to come and weed things out myself.
    "I don't want to leave you with a mess to clean up when I die," she says. Now that we're
moving, she says, it's time.
    Back in Boston for a visit, I shake open a large black trash bag and sit down on the floor
of my old room. From a built-in cabinet, I exhume a postcard of Baryshnikov in midleap, a
silver-plated pendant in the shape of a Hershey's Kiss, faded mimeographs of high school
class songs and summer reading lists, stacks of letters, a flowered fabric-covered scrapbook
(blank). I remember each of these objects perfectly, though I haven't thought of them in
years. I take a breath, open the trash bag, and stuff them in.
    My mother comes in and perches on the edge of the bed. "You don't need to throw
<i>everything</i> away, you know," she says, reaching for a postcard with a cartoon of a girl with
googly eyes on the front and my long-dead paternal grandmother's spidery handwriting on
the back. <i>My most beloved darling</i>. It's dated August 1970. I would have been seven then,
the same age as my daughter now. Will we be sitting together like this, looking at postcards
from my own mother, when my daughter is forty-three?
    My mother says, "You know, you only need to get rid of those things you don't want to
keep."
    What don't I want? I fish the pendant out of the trash bag, fingering the Kiss's paper
pull-tab, which reads "I Love You," and which, amazingly, is still in tact. I give it to my
daughter, along with the scrapbook and a doll with floozy blond hair and tattered clothes,
and pack them all into yet another box to be shipped to our new Ohio home. I retrieve the
letters, the postcards, the mimeographs; I open the cabinet and put them back.
    To my surprise my mother is satisfied with this. In fact she seems relieved. "Everything
will be here for you whenever you want it," she says. ...

- Margot Singer
excerpted from "Afterimage"
<i>River Teeth</i>, Spring 2008
