    ...It was late in December, the last busy days of the year. But the seven or eight boys
on the windy beach were as lighthearted and free as ever. The eldest was twelve, the
youngest nine. They were gathered beneath a dune in lively discussion. Some were
standing. Others sat. One rested his chin in his hands, elbows dug deep in the sand. As they
talked, the sun went down in the west.
    Their talking now over, the boys galloped off along the water's edge. From inlet to inlet
each ran as he pleased. The group was quickly dispersed. One by one they retrieved what
the storm had brought two nights before and the ebb tide had left behind: rotted boards, a
chipped bowl, bamboo slivers, chunks of wood, an old ladle with the handle torn off. The
boys heaped them up on a dry patch of sand away from the lapping waves. All that they
gathered was soaking wet. ...
    The spoils of their hunt they had gathered for burning. With the red flames, wild joy
would be theirs. Running and leaping across, they would prove their courage. And now
from the dunes they gathered dry grass. The eldest stepped forward and touched it with
fire. They stood in a circle and waited to hear the crack of bamboo split by the flames. But
only the grass burned. It caught and died, caught and died. A few puffs of smoke floated
up, nothing more. The wood, the bamboo were untouched. The mirror frame only was
charred here and there. With a weird hiss, steam shot out from the end of the pole. One
after another the boys dropped to the sand and blew at the pile as hard as they could. But
instead of flames, smoke arose, stinging their eyes. Their cheeks were stained with tears. ...
    Look, look, one boy shouted, the Izu hill fires! If their fires burn, then why shouldn't
ours? All leaped to their feet, looking out towards the water. Far across the great Bay of
Sagami two fires flickered and trembled, so feeble they might be just will-o'-the-wisps. Now
that harvest is over, the farmers of Izu must be burning the chaff of their fields in the hills.
Surely these are the fires that bring tears to the eyes of winter travelers. Their distant
beams tell only of the long, dark road ahead.
    The boys danced wildly and clapped and sang, The hills are burning, the hills are
burning. Their innocent voices rang through the dusk, down the long, lonely beach. The
whispering of the waves blended with their voices. The waves rushed in from the southern
tip of the inlet in foaming white lines. The tide was beginning to rise. ...
    Still vexed by their failure, the eldest boy looked back at the pile as he ran. One more
time he looked back from the top of the dune before running down the far side. It has
caught, he shouted, Our fire has caught, when he saw the flames on the beach. The others,
amazed, climbed back to the top. They stood in a row and looked down.
    It was true. The stubborn bits of wood, fanned by the wind, had caught fire. Smoke
billowed up and red tongues of flame shot out, disappeared and shot out again. The sharp
crack of bamboo joints splitting in the fire, the shower of sparks with each report.<sup>1</sup> Indeed,
the fire had caught. But the boys stood their ground, clapped and shouted with joy, then
turned and raced down the hill for home.
    Now the ocean was dark and from the beach, too, the sun was gone. All that was left
was the winter night's loneliness. And on the desolate beach the fire burned, alone,
untended. ...

- Kunikida Doppo
excerpted from "The Bonfire"
Monumenta Nipponica: Studies in Japanese Culture, 1970
The Voyagers' Press
<sup>1</sup>report - an explosive noise