    To see me backpacking, you'd never know I'm the same woman whose blood pressure
rises at the sight of crumbs on her kitchen counter. It's hard to imagine I rage against the
dust bunnies and grit on my hardwood floor, when here in Yosemite's backcountry I sleep
on dirt, stir it into my oatmeal and shake it from my boots. My hair, skin and clothes
thicken with grime each day. Filthy and blistered, I am happier than I have felt in years.
    Perhaps it is the constant exertion that makes me so patient, content. After hauling a
pack stuffed with six days of food and gear up mountain passes, down steep ravines, and
across meadows, I find myself at sunset, hungry and worn to bliss. It's far from the exhaustion
I feel after a grueling day teaching, paying bills, and cooking. No, this is purely
physical. My body aches for sleep, but my mind is as clear as the dusk light on Vogelsang
Lake. In this new place, I feel I've come home.
    At the first light of dawn, I awake to scurry up rocks to watch the sunrise spread soft
pinks, then fiery yellow across the slate sky. In the meadow below me, two deer perk up
their heads to scrutinize a sound on the wind. They begin running and I scan the fields
expecting to see a bear, wolf, or other reason for their flight. Seeing no animal, I wonder if
they're just running to run, something I rarely do. At home, I'm so busy trying to keep up
with my own expectations I'm always running towards something or from something. Here
in Yosemite, there is no such pull. Clutched in the palm of these granite cathedrals, I'm in
awe, a lithe<sup>1</sup> lupine<sup>2</sup> warming to the sun.
    Perhaps this is why dirt in the wilderness never bothers me. I don't need to control it or
mop it away. It's not my dirt or my husband's dirt to clean, but the soil for ponderosas,
sequoias and tufts of mountain grass. It belongs here'crunching beneath my boots, lining
valleys between glacial peaks. Yosemite's dirt doesn't hover behind windows or wait in
painted corners to be swept into a plastic bag. It is the ground beneath me.
    I pick up a handful of pine needle-saturated soil and imagine hurling it across my living
room rug. How much dirt would it take to make my house a home? Could I carry this same
mountain peace back to my rectangular plot of driveway and lawn cut into a grid of streets?
Sifting soil through my fingers, I'm suddenly confused by the shiny black and white
linoleum we installed in our kitchen floor. How did I get so far from this place?
    I've spent too many years identifying comfort with the mattress on my bed and the
water pressure in my shower. Comfort is also this moment sitting with my butt numb from
cold granite, my legs sunburned and caked in dust, my feet blistered and sweating in wool
socks. I wonder how I can remember this luxury when I return home to my terry cloth
robe? Is sanity ever possible within four walls, or will I always hover like dust in window
sunbeams, restless to be outside again?

- Tonya Ward Singer
"Dirt"
<i>In the Mist Magazine</i>, Issue 1.1
<u>www.inthemistmag.com</u>

<sup>1</sup>lithe - graceful
<sup>2</sup>lupine - a flower with an upright spike
