    The forest stretching out before us covers the mountain slopes with splashes of
burgundies and yellows. The delicate hues melt into the blue sky like a runny watercolor
painting. The colors match our expectations for autumn in the mountains, but the scale is
out of kilter. Instead of towering trees, this forest barely reaches our knees.
    On the tundra of Alaska's Denali National Park, the short growing season and long
winters stunt willow, birch and alder trees into pigmy forests. The abbreviated spring and
summer compresses the wildflower bloom into July, and the fall display of colors into the
first two weeks of September. At high latitudes and high elevations, the seasons rush past
like a downhill skier. We can feel winter in the wind.
    We first see a grizzly and her two cubs on a far ridge eating blueberries. The driver
stops, and we crowd toward the right side of the shuttle bus. The bear slowly makes her way
in our direction, the cubs following dutifully. Then one pauses to sniff something. The other
takes the opportunity to pounce, and the two roll and wrestle like playful kittens. The
clicking cameras sound like approaching thunder.
    The bears disappear in a woody depression. We wait. Suddenly, they reappear a few
yards in front of the bus and cross the road. The 400-pound mother methodically raises a
blueberry limb with her powerful claw and delicately nibbles off the ripe fruit while the
whimsical cubs entertain us with their antics.
    "I never dreamed we'd see anything this exciting," one woman whispers. "I expected
incredible scenery and wildlife, but only at a distance. This is like living with the bears." ...
    The bears continue feeding and playing, aware but unconcerned about our presence as
long as we stay on the bus. Paradoxically, "staying on the bus" is the best, and perhaps the
only, relationship humans can have that preserves the wild. We feel a part of nature the
most when our presence affects it the least. ...
    By the time we reach Eielson Visitors Center, Denali is socked in. As one of life's
ironies, something as ephemeral<sup>1</sup> as water vapor can completely obscure the most majestic
peak in North America. The next 30 miles to Kantishna Roadhouse, our overnight lodge,
offer unobstructed views of Denali, if only the clouds will lift. They tease us with glimpses,
but refuse to unmask the face of the mastiff. ...
    We arrive just as streams of the September sun break through low clouds and
illuminate the tops of the snow-covered peaks. Wisps of clouds hover over Denali like a
magician's cloak, but finally the crest is unveiled. Now I understand why the natives called
the mountain "The High One." The peak looms a mile above its 15,000-foot neighbors.
    The beauty of the scene transfixes us. As if on cue, a moose wades into the lake to
create the perfect picture. The combination of wildlife and mountains epitomizes<sup>2</sup> the
essence of pristine North America. We're presented with the gift of wilderness personified. ...
    In Alaska, night doesn't fall, it rises. The tide of darkness creeps up the mountains
slowly and engulfs the alpenglow<sup>3</sup> until only the peaks shine pink. One by one they blink
out like fading beacons, until only Denali lights the sky.
    Denali is not so much to be seen as felt. Elation from the power of the mountain surges
through us. The mountain dwarfs any thoughts we have, any conception we can possess of
its grandeur. It was and is and will be, while we mortals are as clouds sweeping past its face. ...

- George Oxford Miller
excerpted from "Denali"
<i>AAA Going Places</i>, September/October 2009

<sup>1</sup>ephemeral - short-lived
<sup>2</sup>epitomizes - is a typical example of
<sup>3</sup>alpenglow - light seen near sunrise or sunset on the summits of mountains
