    Lynda LaPlante, 45, just wanted to do something nice for her boyfriend, Roland. So
when she heard that singer John Mayer was performing at the Tweeter Center in Mansfield,
Massachusetts, she surfed the Internet hoping to buy a pair of tickets. A "Buy Tickets Now"
Web link took LaPlante to TheSeats.com, where she nabbed two lawn seats at $60 each,
plus an additional $15 for shipping and $18 in service fees. Total price: $153.
    Too bad the tickets really cost $24.95 each. Unbeknownst to LaPlante, she had just
made a way-overpriced, sorry-no-refunds deal on an Internet ticket site. There are two
types of ticket sellers, on the Web: the first, primary sellers, includes box offices and
authorized companies such as Ticketmaster and Tickets.com. The next group is known as
secondary sellers. These more risky dot-coms range from ticket brokers-companies that
scoop up in-demand tickets and resell them for more than face value (using automated
software and phone banks, resellers can snap up thousands of tickets within minutes of a
sale)-to marketplace websites such as StubHub, RazorGator, eBay, and Craigslist, where
individuals can sell tickets for any price, with almost zero guarantees for the buyer. The
result: a Wild West ticket market that's become anywhere from a $3 billion to $20 billion
industry.
    One of the scalper's best weapons: deception. Thanks to the Internet, sellers can lure
buyers to sites that look official but are actually havens for high-priced tickets. That's how
AARP THE MAGAZINE deputy editor Nancy Graham, 51, was duped. While searching the
Internet for "Wolf Trap"-a performing arts center in Virginia-and "tickets," she
mistakenly ended up on GreatSeats.com and bought a pair of orchestra seats to a Doobie
Brothers concert for $160 each. Face value $40. "I feel like a fool," she says. ...
    Price, however, isn't the only problem: all too often buyers of scalped tickets don't get
what they paid for. Arline Zatz, 69, forked over $200 for two $25 seats she bought while
personally visiting a local broker. "I knew they were overpriced and I resented it, but I took
them because they were supposedly in a superior location," she says. Instead, her view was
blocked by a large television camera. Adding to her irritation: "We saw plenty of empty
seats."...
    Some artists are fighting back. In 2006 rock star Tom Petty launched a new fan club to
give faithful followers the first shot at the best seats for his summer tour. When ticket
brokers and independent scalpers joined the club to buy and then resell premium seats for
five times their retail value, Petty's management and promoters had the last laugh.
Ticketmaster, the official distributor for Petty's tour, and the various arenas painstakingly
matched seat locations listed for sale online with those purchased during the fan-club
presale-and voided more than 1,400 tickets so they could be resold to true fans. Buyers
had to show an ID to pick up their tickets on show night. Petty's manger, Tony Dimitriades,
calls it "a step in the right direction and a major strike on behalf of the good guys." ...
    Even industry giant Ticketmaster is making a stand with its online channel, "Stop the
Scammers" (www.ticketmaster.com/stopthescammers). The site allows consumers to report
ticket fraud and includes links to consumer-protection agencies. ...

- Laura Daily
excerpted from "Good Seats, Bad Deals"
<i>AARP THE MAGAZINE</i>, May/June 2007
