    That night, Susan and I stood on the banks of the river, which was moving blackly with
its load of white ice floes.<sup>1</sup> The floes were flat on the top and big as the floor of my cabin.
Some were as big as a river barge. They all moved downstream in a ghostly procession,
separated by jagged black lines where the water was bare. The edges crunched when they
touched and hissed when they swept by. In the center of the river, where the current ran
swifter, a band of floes moved much more quickly than those near the sides.
    The moon was full, which would make the footing easier for Susan, for she must jump
from floe to floe to cross the river. We stood alone-hand in hand at the edge of water, our
skin separated by the wool of our mittens. No other eyes, no other soul, would watch her
go. Silence, stillness, cold. They chimed about us as one snowy chord. ...
    When I saw Susan step upon the ice, I bit my lower lip till the blood flowed down my
chin and crusted in the cold. Here the riverbank was no higher than a step, as from house
to yard. In the moonlight, new snow like sugar glittered atop the sheet of ice lying along the
bank. Behind her, in a lengthening path, Susan's footprints indented the sparkling snow. She
moved toward the center of the river as calmly as though crossing a broad
moonlit road cut through the brush and trees of the wilderness.
    When she came to the first black edge, she stepped across the open water as though it
were a mere stream. The next floe was smaller, and the next even smaller; they dipped or
tilted slightly when she stepped onto them. The spans of open water between them seemed
wider and wider, and sometimes she waited for the current to bring the ice rafts closer
together. Then she leapt the narrowed fissure and walked on. ...
    As the current accelerated and the spaces between floes widened, Susan ran and
jumped from raft to raft; my heart hung in the air with her. In the center of the river, the
swifter current zipped the ice rafts downstream, with Susan standing on one of them. Her
arms fluttered once for balance, twice. ...
    At last the treacherous midsection of river was traversed. She was far from me
now-a dark upright using the flatness: flying and landing, running and leaping, from floe
to floe. I saw shapes in the ice rafts, mostly like enormous animals, flat, not like a natural
swan or bear but flat as a cookie animal or a tin weathervane. Near the other side,
approaching a bend, she had to wait for her floe to come close to the bank. Holding the
stitch<sup>2</sup> in my side, I continued walking as rapidly downstream as I could till I came to a high
but tangled shoreline that thwarted me. Soon the current would sweep Susan's floe beyond
my sight. <i>O, carry her close, carry her close, now,</i> I prayed to the ice, and I prayed that
Susan would not feel herself passing beyond my sight and take the risk of trying to jump
ashore when the gulf remained too great. The floe that wheeled her toward the far shore
was like the palm of a hand, open and presentational.
    Patient Susan! Her ice raft nudged the shore, and she jumped. Even as her shoes
landed on the snowy bank, she turned and looked exactly where I stood. Together we
lifted our arms, blowing each other a kiss across the water, for we had not kissed on
parting, saving it till she should be safe, and trusting the sweet air to be our go-between.
And then one shout, though it was small from the distance, from Susan: <i>Freedom!</i>

- Sena Jeter Naslund
excerpted from <i>Ahab's Wife</i>, 1999
William Morrow and Company, Inc.

<sup>1</sup>floes - pieces of moving ice
<sup>2</sup>stitch - sharp pain
