    The automobile and the motion picture industry are icons of American life. The two
became the perfect match for inventor Richard M. Hollingshead Jr. when he combined
them and opened the first drive-in movie theater in Camden, New Jersey, in the summer
of 1933.
    Hollingshead somehow knew that this type of movie theater could eventually prove
successful, basing his assumption on the fact that a certain segment of the population never
attended indoor movie houses. He felt confident that once his concept became a reality,
people would love the idea of watching movies from inside their automobiles, and he was
right.
    Families were drawn to drive-in movie theaters due in part to their convenience. More
than just a movie was offered to the ticket holder: There was no need to get all dressed up,
you didn't have to hire a babysitter, parking was included in the price of the ticket, and
dinner was just a quick walk to the concession stand. Drive-ins also became popular with
teenagers because it was the ideal place to take a date or socialize with "the gang." What
could be better than dinner and a movie under the stars?
    Toward the latter part of the 1930s, a depressed economy and a world war were just two
of the reasons for the somewhat slow development of drive-in movie theaters. All of that
would change by the mid-1940s.
    After the war, America flourished. With a booming economy, hoards of families flocked
to the suburbs. The setting was perfect for the success of drive-ins. There was plenty of
affordable, available land and the "car culture" in America was just beginning.
    The 1950s was the golden age for drive-in movie theaters. More than 4,600 were
opened for business during the prosperous and defining decade of the baby boom. To lure
in the family trade, playgrounds were built for children while live bands entertained adults.
Never mind that the movies were second-rate as was the sound quality-it was the
"drive-in experience" that kept moviegoers coming back for more.
    As the decade neared an end, so did the popularity of going to the drive-in. By the
mid-1960s and well into the 1970s, "the drive-in experience" had become somewhat
tiresome. The inferior quality of the movies being shown combined with the antiquated
sound system led many customers back to indoor theaters.
    During the 1980s more and more drive-ins began closing down for good. Many owners
jumped at the chance to sell their lots to land developers as a means of getting out of
a sagging business. ...
    Yet with all its adversity and struggle, the drive-in movie theater has endured. It has
withstood the test of time and has become a symbol for a public that is not quite ready to
give up on its nostalgic past.
    Today many drive-ins appear to be enjoying a resurgence in popularity. Owners and
operators, taking pride in their establishments, are now offering Dolby sound along with
first-run movie releases. What began as the idea of one man in Camden, New Jersey, has
become a cultural icon for over half a century. Drive-in movie theaters have been and
always will be part of the American landscape.

- Elizabeth McKeon and Linda Everett
excerpted from <i>Cinema Under the Stars</i>, 1998
Cumberland House
