    I had just passed through Pillar City in South Field Township, Pennsylvania, juking my
pickup around the potholes on Market Street. It was crowded with anthracite<sup>1</sup> coalminer
shacks lying shoulder-to-shoulder, their front porches a chaos of posts and roofs and
wrought iron. Nothing so grand as a pillar adorned them. The town looked like a train wreck
someone had forgotten to report, and after two claustrophobic passes down the main drag
I turned into a side street and out onto a dirt road, pulling into King George's Filling Station
and Grille. The King looked at my Vermont license plates through the greasy window and
wiped his hands on his apron like he might have to reach for something.
    I hadn't expected the place to be so grim, but even the weather had conspired with the
shadowless November light. I was studying my road map, trying to find a way back to the
interstate without backtracking through town, and I had turned on the dome light so I could
see the thin numbered lines when a honey-dew green pickup pulled alongside mine.
    A woman in the passenger seat rolled down the window with a dirty squawk, then
leaned back in her seat, ramrod straight, as a man leaned over her, head out the window.
    "You lost?" the man said. The woman sat stiffly, as though he had a foul smell or she had
been seized by fear.
    "No, just trying to figure out which way to go from here. I know where I am-thanks
for asking," I said. ...
    "You must be lost," he said.
    So I decided to explain. "I'm looking up my family history-they're from around here,
years ago. Worley's the name. Know any Worleys?"
    "I know Worleys."
    "Oh yeah? Probably distantly related. Think they'd talk to me?" I hadn't actually
planned to look up anyone with the name, but it was a lead.
    "Talk to anyone," he said. Now the woman in the seat shifted uncomfortably and
glanced quickly at me. Perhaps she knew Worleys too.
    I asked him to introduce me to anyone named Worley, someone who might be able to
fill in the gaps in my family tree. The day before I had tracked down an ancestor in the
county courthouse archives, a many-great grandfather Daniel. There I made a photocopy
of his 1836 will, a list of his worldly goods, which were spare and simple: a spinning wheel,
a splitting maul, two heifers.<sup>2</sup> His farm had been in this part of the county, and checking the
phone book in the Roman Diner I had found a dozen Worleys listed in Pillar City.
    I didn't explain all of this to the man and woman in the green truck, but they agreed to
lead me to a house where some Worleys lived. I followed them down another road, a flat,
well-graveled route leading straight toward the Upper Tamark Creek. The road made a
sharp bend at the banks of the creek, and the woman in the truck ahead of me stuck her
arm out of the window, pointing at a two-story frame house sheathed in gray stone halfway
up. A man was in the side yard, weaving a riding lawnmower around stumps, an overturned
rowboat, outbuildings, and the carcasses of nameless machines. All the man seemed to be
doing was mulching leaves. I pulled into the horseshoe driveway, a little uneasy that the
green truck had not stopped and was now crossing the bridge over the Tamark. ...

- Naton Leslie
excerpted from "Lost"
<i>Marconi's Dream</i>, 2002
Texas Review Press

<sup>1</sup>anthracite - a hard coal
<sup>2</sup>heifers - young cows
