    ...The man responsible for the layout and ambience of the modern shopping center was
not an American but a Viennese named Victor Gruen, who fled the Austrian Anschluss<sup>1</sup> in
1938 and arrived in America with just $8 in his pocket. Within twelve years he had become
one of the country's leading urban planners. Ironically, Gruen's intention was not to create
a new and more efficient way of shopping but to recreate in America something of the
unrushed cafe-society atmosphere of European city centers. Shopping centers-or
<i>shopping towns</i>, as he preferred to call them-were to be gathering places for the
neighborhood, focal points of the community where people could stroll and meet their
friends, dally over a coffee or an ice cream, and only incidentally shop. Gruen was
convinced that he was designing a system that would slow suburban sprawl and tame the
automobile. How wrong he was. ...
    Shopping centers didn't just transform towns, they often effectively created them. In
the late 1940s, Paramus, New Jersey, was a dying little community with no high school, no
downtown to speak of, and almost no industry or offices. Then two shopping centers were
built along Route 4-Macy's Garden State Plaza and Allied Stores' Bergen Mall. Within a
decade, Paramus's population had more than quadrupled to 25,000 and its retail sales had
shot up from $5 million to $125 million. Much the same thing happened to Schaumburg,
Illinois. In 1956, it had 130 people. Then two things happened: O'Hare became Chicago's
main airport and the Woodfield Shopping Center, with over two million square feet of retail
space, was opened. By 1978, Schaumburg's population had increased almost four-hundredfold
to fifty thousand and it was on course to become the second-biggest city in Illinois after
Chicago by the turn of the century.
    As shopping centers blossomed, downtowns began to die. Between 1948 and 1954, at
the height of America's postwar economic boom, downtown retailers in America's thirteen
largest cities lost on average a quarter of their business. One by one, downtowns grew more
lifeless as stores and offices fled to the suburbs. Hudson's Department Store in Detroit
closed after watching its annual sales fall from $153 million in 1953 to $45 million in 1981,
its last year-the victim, ironically of the automobile, the product that had brought Detroit
its wealth. Sears closed its flagship store on State Street in Chicago in 1983. All over
America, where downtown department stores survived it was as a matter of pride or of tax
breaks, and seldom one of commercial logic. ...
    Mall shopping had become America's biggest leisure activity. Mall of America of
Minneapolis, the country's biggest mall with 4.2 million square feet of consumer-intensive
space (still considerably less than the world's biggest, the West Edmonton Mall in Canada,
with 5.2 million square feet), was forecast to attract more people than the Grand Canyon in
its first year of business. By the early 1990s, Americans were spending on average twelve
hours a month in shopping malls, more than they devoted to almost any activity other than
sleeping, eating, working, and watching television.
    And what of Victor Gruen, the man who had started it all? Appalled at what he had
unleashed, he fled back to Vienna, where he died in 1980, a disappointed man.

- Bill Bryson
excerpted from Made in <i>America</i>, 1994
William Morrow and Company

<sup>1</sup>Austrian Anschluss - the annexation of Austria into Greater Germany by the Nazi regime
