    During her junior year of high school, Candice Backus's teacher handed her a worksheet
and instructed the 17-year-old to map out her future financial life. Backus pretended to buy
a car, rent an apartment, and apply for a credit card. Then, she and her classmates played
the "stock market game," investing the hypothetical earnings from their hypothetical jobs
in the market in the fateful fall of 2008. "Our pretend investments crashed," Backus says,
still horrified. "We felt what actual shareholders were feeling."
    That pain of earning and losing money is a feeling that public schools increasingly want
to teach. Forty states now offer some type of financial instruction at the elementary or
high-school level, embedding lessons in balancing checkbooks and buying stock into math
and social-studies classes. Though it's too early to measure the full impact of the Great
Recession, anecdotally the interest in personal-finance classes has risen since 2007 when
subprime became a four-letter word and bank failures a regular occurrence. Now, a handful
of states including Missouri, Utah, and Tennessee require teenagers to take financial literacy
classes to graduate from high school. School districts such as Chicago are boosting
their offerings in money-management classes for kids as young as elementary school, and
roughly 300 colleges or universities now offer online personal-finance classes for incoming
students. "These classes really say, 'This is how you live independently,'" says Ted Beck,
president of National Endowment for Financial Education.
    Rather than teach investment strategies or financial wizardry, these courses offer a backto-
the-basics approach to handling money: Don't spend what you don't have. Put part of
your monthly salary into a savings account, and invest in the stock market for the long-term
rather than short-term gains. For Backus, this means dividing her earnings from her
part-time job at a fast-food restaurant into separate envelopes for paying bills, spending,
and saving. "Money is so hard to make but so easy to spend," she says one weekday after
school. "That was the big takeaway."
    Teaching kids about the value of cash certainly is one of the programs' goals, but teachers
also want students to think hard about their finances long term. It's easy for teenagers to get
riled up about gas prices because many of them drive cars. But the hard part is urging them
to put off the instant gratification of buying a new T shirt or an iPod. "Investing and retirement
aren't things teenagers are thinking about. For them, the future is this weekend," says Gayle
Whitefield, a business and marketing teacher at Utah's Riverton High School. ...
    That's a big goal for these classes: preventing kids from making the same financial
missteps their parents did when it comes to saving, spending, and debt. Though the
personal savings rate has shot up to 4.2 percent as of July 2009, that's still a far distance from
1982, when Americans saved 11.2 percent of their incomes. It's hard for schools to teach
strict money-management skills when teenagers go home and watch their parents rack up
credit-card debt. It's like telling your kids not to smoke and then lighting up a cigarette in
front of them, Beck says. ...
    Even with these challenges, students such as Backus say learning about money in school
is worthwhile. After Backus finished her financial-literacy class, she opened up a savings
account at her local bank and started to think more about how she and her family would pay
for college. "She just has a better understanding of money and how it affects the world,"
says her mother, Darleen-and that's down to the minutiae<sup>1</sup> of how money is spent at-large
from taxes to bank bailouts to the federal government's deficit. All of this talk of money can
make Backus worry, she says, but luckily, she feels prepared to face it.

- Nancy Cook
excerpted from "Getting Schooled About Money"
<u>www.newsweek.com</u>, September 2, 2009

<sup>1</sup>minutiae - details
