    To get to the blackberry patch, at the back of the farm, sometimes we drove the
pickup, which was a treat. Driving in the fields was a holiday of its own. The grass would
brush the underside of the pickup and you could hear it. Or if we didn't drive, we walked
out there. Talk about tall grass. If you walked out there, you had to go through the big
pasture by the north pond. That pasture had tall fescue grass you had to wade through. If
you sat down, the horizon vanished, the trees on the edge of the field vanished. You could
see just a few feet into the grass, and you could see sky. That was all. You could flatten down
the grass to make a little sitting area. You could make a path to another sitting area and have
two sitting areas and a path. Of course, once the grass was cut for hay, there'd be no more
of that kind of thing. The grass on the front hill was the same.
    They were wild blackberries. Picking them was fun for about the first twelve berries,
then it was work, but you were allowed to eat as many as you wanted. Fresh blackberries
meant you got a cobbler for dinner. You could also put them on your cereal with honey. The
second day, maybe we would crumble hot biscuits into bowls, then sprinkle them with
berries, then add milk or cream, then add honey. It was almost the best thing a person could
eat. There was no name for it, so when you wanted it you had to say the whole thing:
"Biscuits with berries on them and then milk and honey in a bowl." It was a breakfast or a
dessert for lunch or dinner or a snack for after dinner or night. That's what it was. It was all
of that.
    The brambles would scratch you when you were picking berries. Like how a kitten
scratches you on your arms, even though they don't mean it. Also, there were ticks,
chiggers and poison ivy. The hazards of the blackberry patch. You never saw any snakes out
there, but for some reason you were always told that there might be snakes. A watchful eye
was required.
    It felt like a long way from the house, even though you could look across the pastures
and see the house on the hill, residing in the elm shade. Still, it felt like you were really out
somewhere. You knew the creek was not too far away. You couldn't hear any roads from
there. If you looked up, maybe there was a jet making a line in the sky. Not that you could
see the actual jet, just the line.
    Before blackberry month, there were trips to pick strawberries at strawberry farms. For
about three days you ate as many strawberries as humanly possible. The rest had to be
cleaned, sliced, sugared and frozen. Then there were trips to go pick blueberries. And then
you ate as many of them as humanly possible. The rest had to be cleaned and frozen. Or
canned. Canning happened at night because it was too hot to do during the day and it
helped a lot if Dad was home to pitch in. The shadows slanted across the yard.
The shadows slanted across the garden. A horsefly droned past, on his way to
somewhere else. The barn swallows swooped and banked above the horse pasture. They
spiraled, dove. Their forked tails.
One flew right between the legs of the horse. You saw it...

- Jeremy Jackson
excerpted from "Food, Animals"
The Missouri Review, Spring/Summer 2005
