    ...On the days that M'Dear<sup>1</sup> washed her hair, she called them "Days of Beauty." She
spent the whole day pampering herself, and she taught me how to pamper myself as well. ...
    During the wet, cold months that make up a Louisiana winter, M'Dear's hair was so long
and thick that drying it could take all day. On those days we'd stay inside, cleaning, ironing,
and cooking up huge pots of gumbo. I'd climb up onto the big soft chair next to the
fireplace in the kitchen, and shine shoes or sew on buttons or do the other tasks she was
teaching me. I'd sit there and watch her work, watch her go in and out of the washroom like
a breeze was blowing her in.
    On hot Days of Beauty, we'd put on our swimsuits and stand outside on the wooden
platform of the outdoor shower. It was my happy job to scrub clean buckets and other
containers and set them outside to gather rainwater to wash our hair. M'Dear would undo
my braid, pour the rainwater on my head, put on a little Breck shampoo, and wash my hair.
The sun shone down, my mother's hands touched my head, and her fingers lathered love
into me. Never has my hair been so soft. Sometimes I still wash my hair in rainwater, to
remember.
    After our hair was clean, M'Dear would leave hers down, and, still in our swimsuits,
we'd hang clean clothes outside to dry on the line, with me handing her clothespins out of
a small apron she had sewn for me out of flower sacks. I have a photo of us by the
clothesline, doing this very thing. We were working and smiling, squinting slightly in the
sunlight. I was just about to enter first grade, just about to leave behind those motherdaughter
days of intimacy, of little maternal baptisms. M'Dear prepared me for that leaving
so that it was smooth and felt natural. Not all leavings are that easily prepared for.
    After finishing chores and when our hair was dry, M'Dear and I would go down to our
pier, just before sunset. These memories are so vivid to me that I don't need a photograph
to see them. I carry them inside me.
    In one memory, it is growing toward twilight. We are sitting on the pier with the La
Luna River flowing by. ...
    And as the sun sparkled off the cocoa-red water and the wind stirred in the tall pines,
I stood behind my mother, my legs on either side of her, and brushed her hair. I lifted her
long chestnut hair up off her neck, twirled it up on top of her head, then let it fall,
watching its weight settle back down and around her shoulders. Then I'd lean my face into
her hair and smell it. I can close my eyes and smell it now: sun and vanilla.
    What I first learned about love, I learned on that dock with M'Dear. The La Luna River
flowing by with its river sounds, the riverbanks with their lovely sweet citrus scent of
jasmine, the scent of M'Dear's hair, the oils of her scalp, the fullness of her thick, long curls
against my hands, our breathing together, the closeness, her love for me-all of this knit my
soul together. When the fading sunlight hit the river, it bounced up to form iridescence, like
a halo, around M'Dear's head. <i>She is the most beautiful person in the universe</i>. ...

- Rebecca Wells
excerpted from <i>The Crowning Glory of Calla Lily Ponder</i>, 2009
HarperCollins Publishers

<sup>1</sup>M'Dear - the narrator's mother
