    Elizabeth Blake suspended three flint blades from a small wooden frame. Holding her
cell phone in one hand, she took a piece of antler in the other and gently struck each blade
once. Over a bad transatlantic connection, our phone conversation had been difficult, but
the tones from the four-inch-long blades came through-clear, sweet, and crystalline.<sup>1</sup> They
sounded like hand bells or struck goblets. The blades are replicas of 30,000-year-old 
artifacts from the sites of Isturitz in the French Pyrenees and Geißenklösterle in 
southwestern Germany.
    Blake, who is the granddaughter of an opera singer and the daughter of a pianist, is an
archaeology graduate student at Cambridge University. One of the newest members of a
developing sub-discipline, the archaeology of music, she is basing her research on the
hypothesis that our earliest ancestors discovered and enjoyed a peculiar property of some
stone tools-they rang. ...
    The major difficulty that prehistoric musicologists face is that it's so easy to make music
without leaving a trace. In addition to dancing and singing, hunter-gatherer cultures used
natural materials to create instruments. Native Americans shook rattles made from gourds.
Australian aborigines played instruments called didgeridoos fashioned from huge tree limbs
or bamboo. The San of southwest Africa plucked the gut strings of their wooden hunting
bows. What are the odds these would survive for thousands of years to be found (let alone
correctly identified) by an archaeologist? The best anyone can expect to discover is when
humans first began to create reliable and durable instruments.
    Graeme Lawson, an independent archaeologist in England who heads a multidisciplinary<sup>2</sup>
organization known as Cambridge Music-Archaeological Research believes that some
objects now on display in museums may actually be misidentified musical artifacts. One
case in point is a medieval "garment clasp" that was made from a pig knuckle. Lawson 
analyzed the wear patterns and polish around a hole that had been drilled through the 
center of the bone and showed they were consistent with the patterns found on "buzz
bones," a type of noise maker that was used as a children's toy in some parts of Europe until
a few decades ago. When the knuckle bone was tied to a string and whirled through the air,
it would have made an eerie, ghostlike sound.
    How many ancient objects now labeled as "garment clasps" were actually used as noise
makers? How many flint artifacts doubled as chimes? There's plenty for an avid music
archaeologist to do without ever touching a spade.
    The oldest indisputably musical artifacts are flutes (experts call them "pipes") made
from the bones of birds. They come from two sites, Isturitz and Geißenklösterle. The pipes
were found in excavation levels associated with Europe's earliest modern human 
population, the Aurignacian culture. The people at these sites created jewelry, made 
paintings, and crafted sculptures that represented human figures, showing that music was
just one part of an artistic revolution that started in Africa more than 100,000 years ago and
was brought to Europe by anatomically modern humans around 40,000 years ago. ...
    What does survive, of course, is stone. It may seem odd to think of stones as musical,
but [Ian] Cross [a Cambridge musicologist] points out that so-called lithophones have been
documented in many cultures. Musicologists and anthropologists have recorded or
described ringing stones and "rock gongs" in India, the Americas, Europe, Southeast Asia,
and Africa.
    When Cross first began to explore the potential of flint blades as lithophones, he 
considered them as percussion instruments like primitive castanets.<sup>3</sup> Touched together, 
they do make a dull click. It took an archaeologist and a skilled flint-knapper to point out 
the larger possibilities. Ezra Zubrow of SUNY Buffalo and Frank Cowan of the Cincinnati
Museum of Natural History showed Cross that thin, elongated pieces of flint could produce
a tone like a chime. You could say that the idea resonated. ...

- Lois Wingerson
excerpted and adapted from "Rock Music"
<i>Archaeology</i>, September/October 2008

<sup>1</sup>crystalline - bell-like; clear
<sup>2</sup>multidisciplinary - of or representing several fields of study
<sup>3</sup>castanets - small finger cymbal
