    I was lucky enough to discover my passion for flying when I was very young, and to
    indulge that passion day after day. Lucky that some things went my way; my eyesight, for
    instance, was good enough to allow me to become a fighter pilot. And lucky that when I left 
the military, I found work as an airline pilot, when such jobs weren't plentiful. 
    I still feel fortunate, after all these years, to be able to follow my passion. The airline 
industry has its problems, and a lot of the issues can be troubling and wearying, but I still 
find purpose and satisfaction in flying. 
    There's a literal freedom you feel when you're at the controls, gliding above the surface 
of the earth, no longer bound by gravity. It's as if you're rising above the nitty-gritty details 
of life. Even at a few thousand feet, you get a wider perspective. Problems that loom large 
down below feel smaller from that height, and smaller still by the time you reach thirty-five 
thousand feet. 
    I love that flying is an intellectual challenge, and that there's mental math that needs to 
be done all along the way. If you change the angle of the nose versus the horizon by even 
one degree while traveling at a typical commercial airliner speed of seven nautical miles a 
minute, it's enough to increase or decrease your rate of climb or descent by seven hundred 
feet per minute. I enjoy keeping track of all the calculations, staying aware of the weather 
conditions, working with a team-flight attendants, air traffic controllers, first officers, 
maintenance crews-while knowing intimately what the plane can and cannot do. Even 
when the controls are being manipulated through automation, pilots have to back up the 
computer systems with their own mental math. I like the challenge of that. 
    I also like sharing my passion for flying. It's a disappointment to me that a lot of kids 
today aren't especially fascinated by flight. I've watched countless children walk past the 
cockpit without paying much attention; they're too focused on their video games or their 
iPods. 
    When there are children who eagerly want a look inside "my office" at the front of the 
plane, their enthusiasm is contagious. It's so gratifying to see their excitement about some- 
thing I care deeply about. If we aren't busy during boarding, the first officer and I enjoy 
inviting inquisitive children to sit in our seats in the cockpit, ask questions, and let their 
parents take photos of them wearing a captain's hat. 
    Being a pilot has a tangible end result that is beneficial to society. It feels good to take 
a planeload of 183 people where they need or want to go. My job is to reunite people with 
family and friends, to send them on long-awaited vacations, to bring them to loved ones' 
funerals, to get them to their job interviews. By the end of a day, after piloting three or four 
trips, I've taken four or five hundred people safely to their destinations, and I feel as if I've 
accomplished something. All of them have their own stories, motivations, needs-and 
helping them brings a rewarding feeling. 
    This is what gets me ready for work, and one of the things I look forward to. ... 

- Captain Chesley "Sully" Sullenberger with Jeffrey Zaslow 
excerpted from <i>Highest Duty</i>, 2009 
HarperCollins Publishers 
