    The steamboat Bertrand was heavily laden with provisions when it set out on the
Missouri River in 1865, destined for the gold mining camps in Fort Benton, Mont[ana]. The
boat snagged and swamped under the weight, sinking to the bottom of the river. It was
found a century later, under 30 feet of silt a little north of Omaha, Neb[raska].
    Among the canned food items retrieved from the Bertrand in 1968 were brandied
peaches, oysters, plum tomatoes, honey, and mixed vegetables. In 1974, chemists at the
National Food Processors Association (NFPA) analyzed the products for bacterial 
contamination and nutrient value. Although the food had lost its fresh smell and 
appearance, the NFPA chemists detected no microbial growth and determined that the
foods were as safe to eat as they had been when canned more than 100 years earlier. ...
    Canned foods are more than a relic dug from the past. They make up 12 percent of 
grocery sales in the United States. More than 1,500 food products are canned-including
many that aren't available fresh in most areas, such as elderberry, guava, mango, and about
75 different juice drinks. Consumers can buy at least 130 different canned vegetable 
products-from artichokes and asparagus to turnips and zucchini. More than a dozen kinds
of beef are canned, including beef burgers and chopped, corned and barbecued beef. ...
    Food-spoiling bacteria, yeasts and molds are naturally present in foods. To grow, these
microorganisms need moisture, a low-acid environment (acid prevents bacterial growth),
nutrients, and an appropriate (usually room) temperature.
    Dennis Dignan, Ph.D., chief of FDA's [Food and Drug Administration's] food processing
section, explains that foods are preserved from food spoilage by controlling one or more of
the above factors. For instance, frozen foods are stored at temperatures too low for 
microorganisms (bacteria, yeasts and molds) to grow. When foods are dried, sufficient 
moisture is not available to promote growth.
    It is the preservation process that distinguishes canned from other packaged foods.
During canning, the food is placed in an airtight (hermetically sealed) container and heated
to destroy microorganisms. The hermetic seal is essential to ensure that microorganisms do
not contaminate the product after it is sterilized through heating, says Dignan. Properly
canned foods can be stored unrefrigerated indefinitely without fear of their spoiling or
becoming toxic. ...
    Dignan also notes that foods packaged in materials other than metal cans are considered
"canned" by food processing specialists if the food undergoes the canning preservation
process. Thus, today a canned food may be packaged in a number of other types of 
containers, such as glass jars, paperboard cans, and plastics that can be formed into anything
from pouches to soup bowls to serving trays. ...
    Foods with a naturally high acid content-such as tomatoes, citrus juices, pears, and
other fruits-will not support the growth of food poisoning bacteria. In tests, when large
numbers of food poisoning bacteria are added to these foods, the bacteria die within a day.
(The exact amount of time depends upon the bacteria and amount of acidity.) Foods that
have a high acid content, therefore, do not receive as extreme a heat treatment as low-acid
foods. They are heated sufficiently to destroy bacteria, yeasts and molds that could cause
food to spoil. ...
    Low-acid canned foods receive a high dose of heat-usually 107 degrees Celsius 
(250 degrees Fa[h]renheit) for at least three minutes. (The amount of time the food is heat-
ed, though, depends upon the size of the container and the product.) The canned food 
is heated in a retort, a kind of pressure cooker. ...
    Another critical element in the canned food process is sealing products in airtight 
containers. It is essential that air be removed from the container before sealing. Air could
cause the can to expand during heating, perhaps damaging the seals or seams of the 
container.
    A telltale sign of loss of this vacuum<sup>1</sup> -and a possibly contaminated product-is a can
with bulging ends. If a seal is not airtight, bacteria may enter the can, multiply, and 
contaminate the product. ...

- Dale Blumenthal
excerpted and adapted from "The Canning Process"
<i>FDA Consumer</i>, September 1990

<sup>1</sup>vacuum - an airtight seal
