    Skippy was the least important occupant of the house. He was loved, but he was never
consulted. It was taken for granted that the family's will was his will, and that he would 
follow blindly. He was their dog.
    When the family decided to move, Skippy was not invited to voice his views. They
decided quite suddenly, on a day when everything seemed to go wrong. Mrs. Adams
watched the first prize go to Mrs. Cranston at the flower show. Mr. Adams came home from
the publishing house with a book to read and report on, and Mrs. Adams followed him up
to their bedroom, where he had retired to escape the sounds of banging doors, telephones,
and dinner preparations.
    Buzz Adams stormed in cross as sticks because Sally, who lived next door, had given him
back his class ring. Chottie Adams drifted in dreamily from her first meeting with a tall, dark
and handsome young man. When the Adamses sat down to dinner, they began a round of
grievances.
    Mrs. Adams said, with her mouth beginning to waver again, "It isn't that Lila Cranston
has a better growing hand than I have. It's because she has a bigger garden. She doesn't
have to crowd things and let them run riot. I don't know what I wouldn't give to move to a
house with extensive grounds."
    Mr. Adams said vehemently, "I'd like to move, too. I'd like a house big enough to allow me
the luxury of a room of my own."
    "I wish we lived in a stately house," said Chottie wistfully. "Every corner in this house is
crammed with Daddy's old books. We live so informally."
    "If I may put my two cents in," Buzz offered miserably, "I hate this whole neighborhood."
    "That's it!" said Mr. Adams excitedly. "We will move tomorrow, not get out actually, but
tomorrow I'll see the agent for the Thayer place. It's quite an estate, but I can swing it and
the peace is worth the price."...
    Having arrived at this hasty decision to move within a matter of days, the Adamses 
settled down to their excellent dinner, which they all ate with relish, for each thought that
the major problem in his life had just been solved.
    Except Skippy, who, until this moment, had had no problems. He lay under the table in
his accustomed place by Buzz' feet. Usually his head was up, his ears pointing forward, his
mouth ajar to release his eager panting, his tongue extended, and his expression one of 
sublime expectancy. But as the human voices grew impassioned, Skippy's keen perception
noted the shades of discontent expressed in each. He cocked his head and began to listen
intently. ...
    Skippy loved the house. He had lived in it practically all his life. Actually, you might
almost say it was his. For the thing was, the Adamses had bought it because of him. He had been
given to Buzz as a birthday surprise when he, Skippy, was three months old. Until then he had
lived in a kennel which could not be considered home life. He and Buzz had recognized
each other instantly as dog lover and boy worshiper. Two days later the apartment house
agent came over to register the complaint of the people downstairs, who could not accustom
their ears to the overwhelming sounds of a boy and his dog. The dog, the agent explained
regretfully, must go. 
    They moved to a house in the suburbs as soon as a suitable one could be found. It was
a move the elder Adamses had been meaning to make ever since Chottie was born, but one
thing and another kept them chained to the city. And 14 years later a little dog led them to
the charming white house that might have emerged from their dreams. ...
    Now, after five years, as if they had slyly waited until he reached the age when the most
obliging dog balks at change and views the moving of his basket from one corner to another
as a complete upheaval of his lifetime habits, the Family was preparing to depart. ...

- Dorothy West
excerpted from "Skippy"
<i>Daily News</i>, April 29, 1946
