    Glenn Curtiss made his name as an aviator, but he started out his career as a record-
setting motorcyclist, reaching the mind-boggling and joint-rattling speed of 136 miles per
hour in 1907. Later that year he joined Alexander Graham Bell and three other members
of the Aerial Experiment Association to help create ailerons, hinged wing flaps that enable 
airplanes to bank and turn. Curtiss went on to make America's first exhibition flight, win the
first international air-speed prize at Reims, France, in 1909, and design the first practical
seaplane.
    In World War I he made millions with seaplanes and the Curtiss Jenny, a sturdy, 
affordable trainer that became the workhorse of barnstormers<sup>1</sup> and airmail pilots after the
war. In 1917 he created the Curtiss Autoplane, an unsuccessful hybrid of airplane and car.
    In the 1920s the "King of the Air" found that he hankered to get back to his lifelong
loves of hunting, fishing, and camping. At 40, he wanted more comfort for his road trips, so
he decided to build his own travel trailer and create a new business to do so.
    The timing seemed right. The Roaring Twenties saw Detroit's automobile industry 
running full throttle; Americans flocked to the nation's highways. With so few facilities on
the road, many long-distance drivers simply brought their own, sometimes by building 
trailers for themselves. ...
    Curtiss also designed his Aerocar [travel trailer] to free passengers from the tyranny of
bad roads. In the words of his patent application, the occupants of normal vehicles "are 
jolted and jostled about in a most objectionable manner; in fact, so much so that riding
becomes irksome, tiresome, and uncomfortable in the extreme." That was not the case for
Aerocar passengers, who could lounge in fixed armchairs, enjoying close-set windows that
created 10-foot fields of vision on both sides, broken only by window posts. An occupant
could also stretch out on the rear-facing divan in the prow, under a built-in Philco radio. 
A table snapped into place so that passengers might play cards or sit down to a meal 
created in the galley,<sup>2</sup> with its two-burner gasoline stove, icebox, and sink. The chemical 
toilet had its own private compartment.
    A privacy curtain turned the galley into a shower. (A drain in the linoleum took care of
the water.) Concealed Pullman-type bunks pulled down from the roof, while armchairs
folded down to make additional sleeping spaces. Snap-up privacy curtains and individual
reading lights added further amenities.
    The Aerocar's $2,600 price tag clearly placed it in the luxury market, which made it 
difficult to sell during the Depression. Nevertheless, sales of Aerocars managed to weather
the hard times, even surviving Curtiss's unexpected death in 1930 at age 52. ...
    In the Depression year of 1936, the New York Times estimated that 100,000 trailers of
all sorts were already on the road, while buyers were prepared to snap up another
300,000-more than six times what the country's estimated 300 manufacturers expected to
produce in a year. "A new industry is rapidly coming to the front," the paper said. "It is not
an uncommon sight these days to drive past a factory making trailers and find it operating
full blast in the middle of the night. Many plants are running twenty-four hours a day, seven
days a week." At the National Automobile Show later that year, dealers displayed 50 
different models, ranging in price from $275 to $12,000. ...

- Kirk W. House
excerpted and adapted from "Modern Transportation"
<i>American Heritage</i>, Fall 2008

<sup>1</sup>barnstormers - stunt pilots
<sup>2</sup>galley - the kitchen of the travel trail