    Call walked the river for an hour, though he knew there was no real need. It was just an
old habit he had, left over from wilder times: checking, looking for [a] sign of one kind or
another, honing his instincts, as much as anything. In his years as a Ranger captain it had
been his habit to get off by himself for a time, every night, out of camp and away from 
whatever talking and bickering were going on. He had discovered early on that his instincts
needed privacy in which to operate. Sitting around a fire being sociable, yawning and 
yarning, might be fine in safe country, but it could cost you an edge in country that wasn't
so safe. He liked to get off by himself, a mile or so from camp, and listen to the country, not
the men.
    Of course, real scouting skills were superfluous in a place as tame as Lonesome Dove,
but Call still liked to get out at night, sniff the breeze and let the country talk. The country
talked quiet; one human voice could drown it out, particularly if it was a voice as loud as
Augustus McCrae's. Augustus was notorious all over Texas for the strength of his voice. On
a still night he could be heard at least a mile, even if he was more or less 
whispering. Call did his best to get out of range of Augustus's voice so that he could relax
and pay attention to other sounds. If nothing else, he might get a clue as to what weather
was coming-not that there was much mystery about the weather around Lonesome Dove.
If a man looked straight up at the stars he was apt to get dizzy, the night was so clear. Clouds
were scarcer than cash money, and cash money was scarce enough.
    There was really little in the way of a threat to be looked for, either. A coyote might
sneak in and snatch a chicken, but that was about the worst that was likely to happen. The
mere fact that he and Augustus were there had long since discouraged the local
horsethieves. ...
    He tried hard to keep sharp, but in fact the only action he had scared up in six months
of watching the river was one bandit, who might just have been a <i>vaquero</i><sup>1</sup> with a thirsty
horse. All Call had had to do in that instance was click the hammer of his Henry-in the
still night the click had been as effective as a shot. The man wheeled back into Mexico, and
since then nothing had disturbed the crossing except a few mangy goats on their way to the
salt lick. ...
    But somehow, despite the dangers, Call had never felt pressed in quite the way he had
lately, bound in by the small but constant needs of others. The physical work didn't matter:
Call was not one to sit on a porch all day, playing cards or gossiping. He intended to work;
he had just grown tired of always providing the example. He was still the Captain, but no
one had seemed to notice that there was no troop and no war. He had been in charge so
long that everyone assumed all thoughts, questions, needs, and wants had to be referred to
him, however simple these might be. The men couldn't stop expecting him to [c]aptain, and
he couldn't stop thinking he had to. It was ingrained<suo>2</sup> in him, he had done it so long, but he
was aware that it wasn't appropriate anymore. They weren't even peace 
officers: they just ran a livery stable, trading horses and cattle when they could find a buyer.
    The work they did was mostly work he could do in his sleep, and yet, though his day-to-day
responsibilities had constantly shrunk over the last ten years, life did not seem easier. It just
seemed smaller and a good deal more dull. ...

- Larry McMurtry
excerpted and adapted from <i>Lonesome Dove</i>, 1985
Simon and Schuster

<sup>1</sup>vaquero - cowboy or herdsman
<sup>2</sup>ingrained - deep rooted
