    The common raven (Corvus corax) holds a special fascination for bird lovers because of
its complex, even baffling behaviors and its aura of mystery-which are revealed in fact and
embellished in legend.
    This denizen<sup>1</sup> of northern latitudes and high altitude is North America's largest 
passerine, or perching bird, and a relative of the crow. With a length of 24-26 inches and a
wingspan in excess of four feet, this iridescent black bird presents an imposing sight 
especially when it skillfully executes hawk-like flight motions during courtship displays and
while guarding its nest. The raven, you see, is a bit of an aerial acrobat and seems to fly for
the sheer joy of it. Rolls, somersaults and even level flight upside-down may be the most
spectacular behaviors the casual birder will be able to observe.
    Because both birds are large, black, and similarly shaped, it can be hard to tell the 
common raven from the American crow (Corvus brachyrhynchos). In addition to being
somewhat larger, ravens have a heavier beak with a decided "Roman nose" appearance.
They also have shaggy throat feathers, called hackles, which can be slicked down or fluffed
out, apparently to aid communication. In flight, their rounded, wedge-shaped tails and
feathers resemble extended fingers near the ends of their wings. ...
    The raven is both predator and scavenger. Although omnivorous, most of its diet is 
animal matter, including insects, lizards, frogs, rodents and the eggs and young of other
birds. In addition, it regularly dines on carrion<sup>2</sup> and garbage.
    The raven's sometimes inexplicable and genuinely annoying habits-they've been
known to harass livestock and pets, pilfer golf balls and peck holes in the skins of 
unattended light airplanes-led to human reactions that thinned its ranks, particularly in
the Northeast. This bird has made a remarkable comeback in the last few decades, 
however, partly due to its ability to take advantage of the presence of people. The raven can
survive everything from arctic to desert conditions, often aided, ironically, by garbage
dumps and other artifacts of human settlement. ...
    Raven pairs stay together throughout the breeding season and usually bond for life.
Courtship displays generally begin in February, just before breeding. Pairs often return to
previous nesting areas and begin a spectacular aerial courtship ritual. They perform unison
flight maneuvers, sometimes circling their chosen nest site with wingtips nearly touching.
Occasionally, the male takes steep, sudden dives or tumbles in mid-air. Feather-preening
seems to be a common activity while earthbound.
    Ravens prefer remote, forested areas with tall coniferous trees or rocky ledges where
they can build nests and catch air currents that loft them into soaring flights. They also nest
on rugged seacoasts and forested marine islands, as are found off the coast of Maine. ...
    Nests tend to be built in solitary places, typically miles from other raven nests.
Sometimes, new nests are built atop old ones, although nesting pairs may alternate among
two or more sites in the same nesting area from year to year. In this way, the best nesting
areas can be used for 100 years or more. ...
    Many a researcher has discovered firsthand the cunning ways of the raven. Generally
acknowledged to be among the most intelligent of birds, ravens display a seeming social
awareness, even with other species, and surprising problem-solving abilities.
    Accounts abound of ravens closely following large predators such as wolves or coyotes,
and of sharing, unmolested, in their kills once the carnivores opened the carcasses.
Although this could be seen as just opportunistic feeding, the easy relationship between the
species seems to hint at something more substantial.
    Inuit<sup>3</sup> hunting traditions advise watching where ravens circle and dip their wings as a
sure tipoff to the location of game. Some speculate that ravens actually use their aerial 
vantage points to guide larger, stronger predators to prey, which they then share. ...

- Brian W. Swinn
excerpted from "Mystery on the Wing:
Life and Lore of the Common Raven"
<i>New York State Conservationist</i>, December 2005

<sup>1</sup>denizen - inhabitant
<sup>2</sup>carrion - dead flesh
<sup>3</sup>Inuit - native people of northern North America and Greenland
